# Professional Engineering Licensure

We designed Waterloo's Software Engineering program to be accreditable
by both the Canadian Engineering Accreditation Board as well as the
Computer Science Accreditation Council. We have abandoned CS
accreditation, as it requires significant effort and there is no
demand for it.

Engineering accreditation is a more fraught exercise; Memorial
University of Newfoundland was involved in a lawsuit in the 1990s
about its use of the name "software engineering" for a non-accredited
program and agreed to drop the name. Being an accredited engineering
program also imposes significant curriculum constraints, in particular
with respect to requirements for licensure of faculty and minimum
required amounts of natural science content.

In Canada, graduates from a CEAB-accredited engineering program may be
licensed as engineers (PEng) after they (1) have accumulated 4 years
of Canadian professional experience while supervised by a PEng and (2)
pass an examination on engineering law and ethics. Engineering
regulatory bodies take the position that only licensed engineers
should have job titles including the word "engineer", though
enforcement in the software domain is patchy.

In practice, we have observed that very few of our graduates pursue
licensure; Professional Engineers Ontario reported in 2018 that only 7
Waterloo BSE graduates had been licensed. Our exit survey of 2018
graduates reported that 16\% of respondents intended to pursue
licensure. This is difficult in practice; the same survey showed that
only 33\% of our graduates intended to work in Canada, and many will
not be supervised by PEngs.

On the other hand, Canadian engineering graduates are eligible to
receive an iron ring, presented to them at the \emph{Ritual of the
Calling of an Engineer}. In our experience, almost all of our
graduates demonstrate that they identify with the engineering
profession by wearing the ring.

## Recent developments

The most recent public discussion of engineering licensure in Canada
occured in the province of Quebec. Different provinces have different
regulatory regimes. In 2019, the Quebec government proposed amendments
to its \emph{Code des Professions} which would have included
information technology to the regulated areas of practice for
engineers. The \emph{Coalition pour l'avenir de l'informatique}
(Coalition for the future of Computer Science), which included
industrial and academic computer science representatives, campaigned
for information technology to be excluded. The final version of the
law, passed in November 2020, indeed contained a specific exclusion for
computer science (specifically \emph{informatique} in the French).

In the United States, close to zero software engineers sought
licensure as such; the software PE exam was taken by 81 candidates
between 2013 and 2018, when it was discontinued. The American context
is different, most importantly in that "engineer" is not a protected
title.

Should software engineering be licensed? From a more personal context,
none of the authors of this work (all with academic teaching and
research roles) practices engineering based on the Ontario definition
of practice, and none of us has stamped a plan. Note however that, in
some other Canadian jurisdictions (e.g. British Columbia), the
teaching of engineering counts as the practice of engineering.

An extremely important recent development is the effect that software
systems may play in our democracies. In particular, social media
undoubtedly affected the elections in the United States in 2016 and
2020, and in many other places in the world. Engineering is very much
about the responsible development and use of technology in contexts
where it affects human life and safety, and it is hard to argue that
there are no engineering aspects to the design and implementation of
these social media systems. Traditional engineering education may not
provide the background needed to maturely discuss these issues.